README.md, before:

# sy

> Modern file synchronization tool - rsync, reimagined

**sy** (pronounced "sigh") is a fast, modern file synchronization tool with optional integrity verification.

[![CI](https://github.com/nijaru/sy/workflows/CI/badge.svg)](https://github.com/nijaru/sy/actions)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

## Performance

**sy wins:**

- Incremental/delta sync: **3x faster**
- Large files: **40x+ faster** (COW reflinks on APFS/BTRFS)
- Mixed workloads: **2x faster**
- Bulk SSH transfers: **2-4x faster**

**rsync wins:**

- Initial sync of many small files: ~1.3x faster
- SSH incremental: ~1.3x faster

## Why sy?

- Optional integrity verification (`--verify` for xxHash3)
- Simpler CLI with sensible defaults
- Progress, dry-run, and resume out of the box

## Installation

### Homebrew (macOS)

```bash
brew tap nijaru/tap
brew install sy
```

### From crates.io

```bash
cargo install sy

# With optional features
cargo install sy --features acl         # ACL preservation (requires libacl on Linux)
cargo install sy --features s3          # S3 support
cargo install sy --features acl,s3      # Both features
```

### From Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/nijaru/sy.git
cd sy
cargo install --path .
```

**Build requirements:**

- Rust toolchain (any recent stable version)
- Linux only: For ACL support (`--features acl`), install `libacl1-dev` (Debian/Ubuntu) or `libacl-devel` (Fedora/RHEL)
- macOS: ACL support works out of the box (native support)

**For SSH sync:** Install sy on both local and remote machines.

## Quick Start

```bash
sy /source /destination
```

That's it. Use `sy --help` for options.

> **Directory behavior:** sy follows rsync semantics - `/source` copies the directory, `/source/` copies contents only.

## Examples

### Backup & Sync

```bash
sy ~/project ~/backup                    # Basic backup
sy ~/src ~/dest --delete                 # Mirror (delete extra files)
sy ~/src ~/dest --verify                 # Verify after write (xxHash3)
sy ~/backup ~/original --verify-only     # Audit existing files
sy /source /dest --dry-run               # Preview changes
```

### Remote Sync

```bash
sy /local user@host:/remote              # SSH sync
sy /large user@host:/backup --bwlimit 1MB
sy /local s3://bucket/path               # S3 sync
```

### Advanced

```bash
sy ~/src ~/dest --exclude "*.log"        # With filters
sy ~/dev /backup --watch                 # Continuous sync
sy --bidirectional /laptop /backup       # Two-way sync
sy ~/src ~/dest -u                       # Skip files where dest is newer
sy ~/src ~/dest --ignore-existing        # Skip files that already exist
sy ~/src ~/dest --gitignore              # Respect .gitignore rules
sy ~/src ~/dest --gitignore --exclude-vcs # Developer workflow (no .git, respect .gitignore)
sy ~/src ~/dest -j 1                     # Sequential mode (many tiny files)
```

### S3 & Cloud Storage

sy supports AWS S3 and compatible services (Cloudflare R2, Backblaze B2, Wasabi, MinIO).

**Authentication:**
Standard AWS environment variables are supported:

```bash
export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID="your-key-id"
export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY="your-secret-key"
export AWS_REGION="us-east-1"
```

**Usage:**

```bash
# Basic S3 sync
sy /local/path s3://my-bucket/backups

# With custom region
sy /local/path s3://my-bucket/backups?region=eu-central-1

# With custom endpoint (e.g., Cloudflare R2)
sy /local/path s3://my-bucket/backups?endpoint=https://<accountid>.r2.cloudflarestorage.com
```

## Features

**Core Performance:**

- Parallel transfers and checksums
- Delta sync (rsync algorithm, O(1) memory)
- Checksum database (10-100x faster re-syncs)
- Compression auto-detection
- Sparse file optimization

**Transports:**

- Local filesystem
- SSH (requires sy on remote)
- S3/cloud storage support (AWS S3, Cloudflare R2, Backblaze B2)

**Reliability:**

- Optional integrity verification (xxHash3 via `--verify`)
- Atomic operations
- Resume support
- Dry-run and verify-only modes

**Advanced:**

- Bidirectional sync with conflict resolution
- Watch mode for continuous sync
- Rsync-style filters and .gitignore support
- Hooks, JSON output, config profiles
- Metadata preservation (symlinks, ACLs, xattrs)

## Platform Support

- ✅ **macOS**: Fully tested
- ✅ **Linux**: Fully tested
- ⚠️ **Windows**: Untested (should compile)

## Contributing

Contributions welcome! See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md).

Interested in:

- Windows testing
- Performance profiling
- Real-world feedback

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

docs: Clarify that subsequent syncs are faster

README.md, after:

# sy

> Modern file synchronization tool - rsync, reimagined

**sy** (pronounced "sigh") is a fast, modern file synchronization tool with optional integrity verification.

[![CI](https://github.com/nijaru/sy/workflows/CI/badge.svg)](https://github.com/nijaru/sy/actions)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

## Performance

**sy wins:**

- Incremental/delta sync: **3x faster**
- Large files: **40x+ faster** (COW reflinks on APFS/BTRFS)
- Mixed workloads: **2x faster**
- Bulk SSH transfers: **2-4x faster**

**rsync wins:**

- Initial sync of many small files: ~1.3x faster
- SSH incremental: ~1.3x faster

> **Note:** After the first sync, sy is 3x faster on subsequent runs. The initial overhead pays off quickly.

## Why sy?

- Optional integrity verification (`--verify` for xxHash3)
- Simpler CLI with sensible defaults
- Progress, dry-run, and resume out of the box

## Installation

### Homebrew (macOS)

```bash
brew tap nijaru/tap
brew install sy
```

### From crates.io

```bash
cargo install sy

# With optional features
cargo install sy --features acl         # ACL preservation (requires libacl on Linux)
cargo install sy --features s3          # S3 support
cargo install sy --features acl,s3      # Both features
```

### From Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/nijaru/sy.git
cd sy
cargo install --path .
```

**Build requirements:**

- Rust toolchain (any recent stable version)
- Linux only: For ACL support (`--features acl`), install `libacl1-dev` (Debian/Ubuntu) or `libacl-devel` (Fedora/RHEL)
- macOS: ACL support works out of the box (native support)

**For SSH sync:** Install sy on both local and remote machines.

## Quick Start

```bash
sy /source /destination
```

That's it. Use `sy --help` for options.

> **Directory behavior:** sy follows rsync semantics - `/source` copies the directory, `/source/` copies contents only.

## Examples

### Backup & Sync

```bash
sy ~/project ~/backup                    # Basic backup
sy ~/src ~/dest --delete                 # Mirror (delete extra files)
sy ~/src ~/dest --verify                 # Verify after write (xxHash3)
sy ~/backup ~/original --verify-only     # Audit existing files
sy /source /dest --dry-run               # Preview changes
```

### Remote Sync

```bash
sy /local user@host:/remote              # SSH sync
sy /large user@host:/backup --bwlimit 1MB
sy /local s3://bucket/path               # S3 sync
```

### Advanced

```bash
sy ~/src ~/dest --exclude "*.log"        # With filters
sy ~/dev /backup --watch                 # Continuous sync
sy --bidirectional /laptop /backup       # Two-way sync
sy ~/src ~/dest -u                       # Skip files where dest is newer
sy ~/src ~/dest --ignore-existing        # Skip files that already exist
sy ~/src ~/dest --gitignore              # Respect .gitignore rules
sy ~/src ~/dest --gitignore --exclude-vcs # Developer workflow (no .git, respect .gitignore)
sy ~/src ~/dest -j 1                     # Sequential mode (many tiny files)
```

### S3 & Cloud Storage

sy supports AWS S3 and compatible services (Cloudflare R2, Backblaze B2, Wasabi, MinIO).

**Authentication:**
Standard AWS environment variables are supported:

```bash
export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID="your-key-id"
export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY="your-secret-key"
export AWS_REGION="us-east-1"
```

**Usage:**

```bash
# Basic S3 sync
sy /local/path s3://my-bucket/backups

# With custom region
sy /local/path s3://my-bucket/backups?region=eu-central-1

# With custom endpoint (e.g., Cloudflare R2)
sy /local/path s3://my-bucket/backups?endpoint=https://<accountid>.r2.cloudflarestorage.com
```

## Features

**Core Performance:**

- Parallel transfers and checksums
- Delta sync (rsync algorithm, O(1) memory)
- Checksum database (10-100x faster re-syncs)
- Compression auto-detection
- Sparse file optimization

**Transports:**

- Local filesystem
- SSH (requires sy on remote)
- S3/cloud storage support (AWS S3, Cloudflare R2, Backblaze B2)

**Reliability:**

- Optional integrity verification (xxHash3 via `--verify`)
- Atomic operations
- Resume support
- Dry-run and verify-only modes

**Advanced:**

- Bidirectional sync with conflict resolution
- Watch mode for continuous sync
- Rsync-style filters and .gitignore support
- Hooks, JSON output, config profiles
- Metadata preservation (symlinks, ACLs, xattrs)

## Platform Support

- ✅ **macOS**: Fully tested
- ✅ **Linux**: Fully tested
- ⚠️ **Windows**: Untested (should compile)

## Contributing

Contributions welcome! See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md).

Interested in:

- Windows testing
- Performance profiling
- Real-world feedback

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.
